---
author: mbailey
comments: true
date: 2012-11-26 12:32:11+00:00

slug: fun-with-retinal-burns
title: Fun with Retinal Burns
wordpress_id: 529
categories:
- perception
tags:
- optics
---

**Disclaimer: Don't look at any bright light source. It may damage your eyes!**

The sound of a fly buzzing meant Â one more thing for me to before going to bed.
What happened next took me by surprise and provided some fascinating
entertainment that I thought I'd share with you.

Returning from the kitchen with a can of fly spray, I heard it's intended
target was in the last remaining light source in my house - the big orange
lampshade by the couch. After peering down into the lampshade and releasing a
couple of light sprays I returned to the darkened kitchen only to notice I was
seeing spots, three large overlapping ones to be precise.

These black Venn Diagrammesque apparitions were due to photobleaching of the
chemicals my eyes use to sense light. They were in three distinct places
because the eye flicks quickly when scanning - if I had been watching a marble
race I'm sure it would have been a circle.

Anyway, we've all see spots right? What was really neat was what I discovered
next...

Covering my eye made the spots go a light colour. Looking at the pantry doors
resulting in them being dark. The spots faded within seconds however covering
my eyes brought them back, as did shifting my gaze to a different area in the
room. I think I've found a new way to demonstrate perceptual filling-in. Until
now I've only heard of [blind spot
fill-in](http://www.med.yale.edu/neurobio/mccormick/fill_in_seminar/introduction.html).

The beauty of retinal burn fill-in is that you don't need to find your blind
spot, or be a certain distance from things as you can control where you place
the burn. It's amazing to watch the burn dissolve as the brain fills in the
missing information. I'd advise against deliberately looking into any bright
light source **but** next time it happens I suggest you use the opportunity to
experience first hand the difference between the signals your eyes send and
what you perceive.
