# Git

- [git submodules](git/git-submodules.md)

- [Git - user-manual](https://git-scm.com/docs/user-manual) (file:///usr/share/doc/git/user-manual.html)
- [Git - Community](https://git-scm.com/community)
- `man gittutorial`
- [Tech Talk Linus Torvalds on git - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XpnKHJAok8&list=WL&index=2&t=2s)
    - distributed
- https://gregoryszorc.com/blog/2021/05/12/why-you-shouldn%27t-use-git-lfs/
    - performance
- `git stash pop` song by The Ramones [Blitzkrieg Bop (2016 Remaster) - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skdE0KAFCEA)
- [How to Use Git Shallow Clone to Improve Performance  Perforce (www.perforce.com)](https://www.perforce.com/blog/vcs/git-beyond-basics-using-shallow-clones)

## Ignore some files locally

- [How do I configure git to ignore some files locally - Stack Overflow (stackoverflow.com)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/1753070/how-do-i-configure-git-to-ignore-some-files-locally/1753078#1753078)

> Patterns which are specific to a particular repository but which do not need to be shared with other related repositories (e.g., auxiliary files that live inside the repository but are specific to one user's workflow) should go into the `$GIT_DIR/info/exclude` file.

Note, if you already have unstaged changes you must run the following after editing your ignore-patterns:
```
git update-index --assume-unchanged <file-list>
```

## Share via sneakernet

    wget https://github.com/mbailey.gpg
    gpg --import ./mbailey.gpg
    # cd cloned git repo
    git bundle create mbailey.bundle --all
    gpg --recipient mike@example.com  -e  mbailey.bundle
    # Send me mbailey.bundle.gpg

## Check out file from specific commit

    git checkout c5f567 -- file1/to/restore file2/to/restore

## git ignore

### Check which rule caused git to ignore

    git check-ignore -v path/to/check

### Which file to place a pattern in depends on how the pattern is meant to be used.

•   Patterns which should be version-controlled and distributed to other repositories via clone (i.e., files that all developers will
    want to ignore) should go into a .gitignore file.

•   Patterns which are specific to a particular repository but which do not need to be shared with other related repositories (e.g.,
    auxiliary files that live inside the repository but are specific to one user’s workflow) should go into the $GIT_DIR/info/exclude
    file.

•   Patterns which a user wants Git to ignore in all situations (e.g., backup or temporary files generated by the user’s editor of
    choice) generally go into a file specified by core.excludesFile in the user’s ~/.gitconfig. Its default value is
    $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/git/ignore. If $XDG_CONFIG_HOME is either not set or empty, $HOME/.config/git/ignore is used instead.

### gitignore (and gitattributes) PATTERN FORMAT

•   A blank line matches no files, so it can serve as a separator for readability.

•   A line starting with # serves as a comment. Put a backslash ("\") in front of the first hash for patterns that begin with a hash.

•   Trailing spaces are ignored unless they are quoted with backslash ("\").

•   An optional prefix "!" which negates the pattern; any matching file excluded by a previous pattern will become included again. It
    is not possible to re-include a file if a parent directory of that file is excluded. Git doesn’t list excluded directories for
    performance reasons, so any patterns on contained files have no effect, no matter where they are defined. Put a backslash ("\") in
    front of the first "!" for patterns that begin with a literal "!", for example, "\!important!.txt".

•   The slash / is used as the directory separator. Separators may occur at the beginning, middle or end of the .gitignore search
    pattern.

•   If there is a separator at the beginning or middle (or both) of the pattern, then the pattern is relative to the directory level of
    the particular .gitignore file itself. Otherwise the pattern may also match at any level below the .gitignore level.

•   If there is a separator at the end of the pattern then the pattern will only match directories, otherwise the pattern can match
    both files and directories.

•   For example, a pattern doc/frotz/ matches doc/frotz directory, but not a/doc/frotz directory; however frotz/ matches frotz and
    a/frotz that is a directory (all paths are relative from the .gitignore file).

•   An asterisk "*" matches anything except a slash. The character "?" matches any one character except "/". The range notation, e.g.
    [a-zA-Z], can be used to match one of the characters in a range. See fnmatch(3) and the FNM_PATHNAME flag for a more detailed
    description.

Two consecutive asterisks ("**") in patterns matched against full pathname may have special meaning:

•   A leading "**" followed by a slash means match in all directories. For example, "**/foo" matches file or directory "foo" anywhere,
    the same as pattern "foo". "**/foo/bar" matches file or directory "bar" anywhere that is directly under directory "foo".

•   A trailing "/**" matches everything inside. For example, "abc/**" matches all files inside directory "abc", relative to the
    location of the .gitignore file, with infinite depth.

•   A slash followed by two consecutive asterisks then a slash matches zero or more directories. For example, "a/**/b" matches "a/b",
    "a/x/b", "a/x/y/b" and so on.

•   Other consecutive asterisks are considered regular asterisks and will match according to the previous rules.



## Checkout Remote Branch

    git checkout --track origin/gh-pages

## Diff two arbitrary files using git diff (e.g. for gpg files)

  git diff --no-index file1 file2

## Command to change the author for the last N commits:

    git rebase -i HEAD~N -x "git commit --amend --author 'Author Name <author.name@mail.example>' --no-edit"

## Update forked github repo

    git remote add upstream git@github.com:original-repo/goes-here.git
    git fetch upstream
    git rebase upstream/master
    git push origin master --force-with-lease

## gpg diff

    https://gist.github.com/marceloalmeida/e6593b93b388cdf1dbc282dffd424d1b#file-readme-md

    git config --global diff.gpg.textconv "gpg --no-tty --decrypt"

    echo "*.gpg filter=gpg diff=gpg" >> .gitattributes
    echo "*.asc filter=gpg diff=gpg" >> .gitattributes

## Delete dangling commits

- [Listing and deleting Git commits that are under no branch (dangling) - Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3765234/listing-and-deleting-git-commits-that-are-under-no-branch-dangling)

## Untracked files
Remove untracked files:

```shell
git clean -f
```

Stash untracked files

```shell
git stash --include-untracked # short arg is -u
```


## git ignore

Personal:
```
.git/info/exclude
```

Global:
```bash
$ touch ~/.gitignore
$ git config --global core.excludesFile ~/.gitignore
```

## shallow clone

Less files and no .git dir:

    git clone --depth=1 git://someserver/somerepo dirformynewrepo
    rm -rf !$/.git

## git filter-repo

`git filter-repo` ([github][1]) is a versatile tool for rewriting history. It is now recommended by the git project instead of `git filter-branch`.

git-filter-repo is a single-file python script, which was done to make installation for basic use on many systems trivial: just place the script into your $PATH.

Installation is as easy as:

    $ PACKAGE_TOOL install git-filter-repo

[1]: https://github.com/newren/git-filter-repo

## Remove file:

  # git recommends using [git-filter-repo](https://github.com/newren/git-filter-repo/#simple-example-with-comparisons)

    git filter-branch --index-filter "git rm -rf --cached --ignore-unmatch path_to_file" HEAD


### Remove large file

**[100 times faster than git filter-branch and simpler (stackoverflow.com)](https://stackoverflow.com/a/61602985/660017)**

> Warning: Do this on a copy of your repository. Many actions of filter-repo cannot be undone. filter-repo will change the commit hashes of all modified commits (of course) and all their descendants down to the last commits!

First you can run:

    git filter-repo --analyze

This helps you to determine what to do next.

You can delete your DVD-rip file everywhere:

    git filter-repo --invert-paths --path-match DVD-rip


## Branches

### Rename default branch

I don't want to have to remember what the default branch is named.

    git branch -m main master
    git push -u origin master

- [stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/a/69344918/660017)

## Maintain standard initial branch

    git config --global init.defaultBranch master

## Organising your clones

Not sure whether I want to include org in clone path like this this guy does:

> This is how I organize my source code.
>
> ```txt
> -- source
> |   |-- dotfiles
> |   |-- hyperclient
> |   |   |-- codegram
> |   |   `-- dblock
> |   `-- grape
> |       |-- grape
> |       |   |-- ruby-grape
> |       |   `-- dblock
> |       `-- grape-swagger
> |           |-- ruby-grape
> |           `-- dblock
> ```
>
> [A Directory Structure for OSS and Work Github Clones](https://code.dblock.org/2016/03/25/a-directory-structure-for-oss-and-work-github-clones.html)


## lfs

    git lfs ls-files --all

Remove from lfs

    git lfs untrack '<file-type>'
    git rm --cached '<file-type>'
    git add '<file-type>'
    git commit -m "restore '<file-type>' to git from lfs"

